---
title: 'Sean and Ezra talk Quantum Mechanics'
date: 2020-05-14
permalink: /posts/2020/05/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - Quantum Mechanics
  - Science Communication
---

Two of my absolute favorite public intellectual figures, [Ezra Klein](https://www.vox.com/authors/ezra-klein) (journalist and founder of Vox Media) and [Sean Carroll](https://www.preposterousuniverse.com),
(physicist and science communicator) recently got together to talk about physics.
The resulting [podcast](https://megaphone.link/VMP8224086718) is the best conversation I've heard between a non-physicist and physicist about quantum mechanics.
They have inspired me to write up a few of the ways I have come to terms with physics.
What follows are my expansions on their discussion. I've tried to make it useful as a standalone bit of writing but have also included time stamps so that you can follow along with the podcast. 

**Work in Progress**


Quantum beings having a classical experience  
------
**16:20** The phrase "We are not classical beings having a quantum experience, we're quantum beings having a classical experience" gets to the heart of why the subject of quantum mechanics is so hard.
There is no way for the [messy bags of meat that are human beings](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/They're_Made_Out_of_Meat) to have a quantum experience of the world.
Consider what it would mean to directly observe an object in a superposition of states.
Your brain would have to be in a superposition of experiencing both states and capable of manipulating the phase relationship betwween those states.
Your sense experience is an emergent phenomenon resulting from an enormous number large molecules constantly performing chemical reactions and outputting about 25 watts of infrared photons.
Those photons are zooming away at the speed of light, carrying with them the quantum state information you would need to be manipulating to maintain your quantum experience.

Preventing the leak of relevant quantum information through photons (and other exitations like quantum sound waves called phonons) is what makes quantum computation so incredibly hard.
In principle a powerful quantum computer running a full AI system would have a truly quantum experience, but that experience would be confined to its inner monologue, not extending out to the warm messy world around us.
It would only be able to maintain that quantum monologue by carefully protecting its logical processes with a process called quantum error correction, which can literally be thought of as information refrigeration.
Heat makes its way into the system and expresses itself as quatum errors which are carefully detected and expelled. This process creates even more heat but in a controlled manner so that it can be directed outward.

Such a quantum being would have a different experience of time from our own. Quantum computation is fundamentally _reversible_.
Quantum logical operations do not destroy information like classical logic gates.
If I tell you the output of an AND gate is 1, you know both inputs are one.
If on the other hand I tell you the output is 0 you have no way of knowing if either of the inputs (but not both) were 1.
Deleting information, or letting it zoom away as photons is what lets time move forward and entropy increase.
Quantum computers increase entropy in the error correction process but the logical manipulations themselves do not!
I'm not sure what this would be like for an AI experiencing such a life, but I'm certain it would be very interesting to ask.
Hopefully it will be eloquent and concise so we can have a hope of understanding. 


It's philosophy and that's OK!  
------
**18:00** At this point in the discussion, Ezra notes that both the Copenhagen and Many World interpretations rely on deeply uncomfortable notions. Either:
1. Measurment changes reality as quantum states randomly collapse with prescribed probability.
2. Reality continues smoothly during measurement, but along an exponentially growing set of "worlds" unable to interact with each other and we find ourselves in only one of these "worlds" with a prescribed probability.  

Both of these interpretations are bizzare and uncomfortable, but remarkably, they are operationally identical! There is no experiment, even in principle that would allow us to tell us which interpretation is "correct".
The reason for this is that the Copenhagen rules for measurment are logically [redundant](https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.11060) if you assume that any finite quantum system can be described with finitely many parameters,
and that the outcome of a measurment cannot depend on the arbitrary definitions of boundaries between subsystems.

This does not imply it is pointless to think about different interpretations which are logically equivalent for the restricted world of our experience. 
The value of thinking about these different interpretations is the same as the value of understanding anything in multiple ways: Different perspectives inspire new ideas which may or may not be useful.
Sean is interested in Many Worlds because he believes it could be a useful stepping stone to understanding how/if the structure of spacetime emerges from a more abstract quantum system.

Physicists often confuse philosophy for physics but I am optimistic that we are slowly getting better at understanding and appreciating the nuanced interplay between these fields.
Over the last couple years I have come to appreciate how much of the rhetoric of high energy physics is based on na&iumlve philosophical underpinnings.
[Sabine Hossenfelder](http://sabinehossenfelder.com)'s book [Lost In Math](http://sabinehossenfelder.com/index.php/writing/book) forced me to confront these issues and I am a better scientist because of it.


Some infinities are bigger than others  
------
**20:30** Grappling with the enormity of the thing implied by the Many Worlds interpretation, Ezra quips that "the universe is branching an uncountable number of times every second...".
Most people use the word "uncountable" to mean "so many I can't imagine counting" but mathematicians use it to mean "so many it is not possible in principle to count".

No one can count the entire set of natural numbers $1,\, 2,\, 3,\, ...$ but it is easy to imagine how you would count them, it would just take literally forever.
It's a bit harder to imagine counting the set of positive rational numbers, but with a bit of thought it might occur to you to take  
$$ \frac{n}{n},\, \frac{n}{n-1},\, \frac{n}{n-2},\, ...,\, \frac{n}{1} $$  
starting with n=1 and increasing n by one each time the sequence terminates:  
$$ \frac{1}{1},\, \frac{2}{2},\, \frac{2}{1},\, \frac{3}{3},\, \frac{3}{2},\, \frac{3}{1},\, \frac{4}{4},\, \frac{4}{3},\, ... $$  
This defines a process by which one could, given infinite time, count all of the positive rational numbers.
It's not hard to generalize this to the set of all rational numbers which would constitute a proof that the rational numbers are "countably infinite".

There is _no way_ to define an algorithm to count all of the real numbers, let alone the real numbers between any two rational numbers. This makes the set of real numbers "uncountably infinite".
For a long time it was not understood if there was a meaningful notion of an infinity larger than "countable" but less than "uncountable".
The non-existence of such an infinity is known as the [continuum hypothesis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Continuum_hypothesis), and today we know the answer but it is deeply unsatisfying.
You can choose if such an infinity exists or not, and set theory will work either way, assuming set theory is itself consistent which cannot be proven...

Anyway, the distinction between what mathematicians mean by countable (infinite but in a countable way) and what normal people mean by countable (finite) is a pedantic point,
but one that recently has turned out to have quite dramatic consequences for what questions can in principle be answered in a quantum world.
More on this in the next section.


On the dimensionality of Hilbert Space  
------
**23:46** Here Ezra turns his focus to the bizzare world in which quantum mechanics operates known as [Hilbert Space](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hilbert_space).
He asks "What is Hilbert Space describing? ... As I understand how you have described Hilbert Space, there is some limit on how much [world branching] there can be, so what is that limit?".
This is an excellent question and as Sean points out, we really don't know the answer.
I suspect the answer may turn out to be somewhat similar to the unsatisfying answer for the continuum hypothesis as described in the previous section.
The way we do quantum mechanics including the effects of [Special Relativity](https://www.patrickbryant.page/files/relativity.pdf) requires that the dimension of Hilbert space is at least countably infinite.
We understand the interations of elementary particles through an infinite sum of interacting waves with progressively shorter and shorter wavelengths.
These calculations are typically made possible by understanding how the shorter frequency waves contribute less and less to the final answer so that we can get an approximate answer by truncating the sum.
In some special cases we can construct theoretical systems in which the exact infinite sum can be fully calculated but all of these deviate from the world we observe in interesting and surprising ways.

When we try to include the effects of gravity ([General Relativity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General_relativity)), the really short wavelength parts of the sum start to dominate the answer.
The energy associated with these very short wavelength parts is so big, that their self gravitational pull would suggest they collapse into tiny black holes. The shorter the wavelength, the bigger the black hole. 
This is of course an oversimplified explanation but it hints that gravity may have the bizzare effect of regulating the dimension of Hilbert space in some way such that it is finite.
Special Relativity requires an infinite dimensional Hilbert space but General Relativity wants to play out on only finitely many dimensions.

It was [recently shown](https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.04383) that in certain scenarios finite dimensional Hilbert spaces cannot even approximate infinite dimensional ones.
This result came as quite a surprise to the physics community as it emerged as a consequence of a seemingly unrelated question in the field of Complexity Theory.
Quanta Magazine has a [nice explanation](https://www.quantamagazine.org/landmark-computer-science-proof-cascades-through-physics-and-math-20200304/) for the interested lay-person.
There is a mountain of exciting work happening on the links between physics and information/computation/complexity and I'll be watching this space closely.
[Scott Aaronson's blog](https://www.scottaaronson.com/blog/) is a great place to read about such developments.
I also recommend following [Henry Yuen](https://twitter.com/henryquantum) (one of the authors of this result) and [John Preskill](https://twitter.com/preskill) on twitter.


<!---
On the _Reality_ of the Wave Function  
------
**32:00** Determinism vs Chaos: Initial conditions are hidden variables (37:50 after the ad break)
Intuitionist Mathematics
The rules of dynamics can be written down but their exact consequences cannot.


On the implications of Everrettian Interpretation.  
------
**40:40** The range of possible 'worlds'. Is it possible to make Ezra into a classical violinist instantly without violating physical laws?
The remarkable robustness of _classical_ computers. 


On adding a 'camera' to a double slit experiment  
------
**55:00** What does the camera do that the atoms in the slit do not? Answer, the state of the atoms in the slit are not sensitive to a passing particle.


Defining Entaglement: Nuclear decay, momentum conservation:  
------
**59:50** Someone observes decay product in a place far away - instantly know which way the other particle went and where it is now.
(What is meant by 'World' in the Many Worlds interpretation?)
 Meanwhile, someone on the other side far away observes a decay product, no causal connection between the observers, almost certainly observed the particles in locations inconsistent with conservation of momentum - implies their states are almost perfectly decoupled from eachother, being able to interact would appear to violate momentum conservation.


On the Solidness of Things: How QM is a critical part of allowing our classical experience  
------
**1:15:57** Why Ideal Gases are a thing
Spin-statistics


Good New Bad News  
------
**1:18:40** The future of physics in a world that we mostly understand despite seemingly inconsistent physics in extreme circumstances. 
--->

